How do we pronounce your name?
Karpolis.
Right.
We're Greek.
It almost looks like a Greek name.
It's not O-U-S.
It's E-S.
It's a slight difference.
Well, very close.
It's Austrian.
Yeah.
Well, it used to be Austrian.
Now, I guess, it's from a city named Brandeis, which is on the border, on the very border of Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.
So it depends on where they were standing at the time.
But at that time, it was part of the Austrian, Hungarian empire.
So it's, I guess, Austrian, but now it's something different.
Really, Bart Orbeck told me that when I was coming out to California, I really had to see you.
He said my book would be incomplete without including you.
And he really told me very little about you.
He said, come out and meet you.
And so this is like
kind of new to me.
I'd like to say I've done a lot of background, but really I haven't because I don't know much, but we're going to tell the world in this book about you if that's okay.
This is a private collection that we're looking at?
This is a private collection, although our museums are open to the public and they're all free.
There's no charge for either any admission or services.
We are very well known throughout the world in various universities by we.
Me, myself, and I had, who knows, my wife and the kids, whatever.
The libraries, I should say, are quite well known throughout the world in universities and so forth.
And we get quite a few scholar requests, either for Xeroxes or microfilm, or some of them want to come and visit the library and actually study the manuscripts in person.
And this we do free also.
We provide Xeroxes.
You're happy to provide Xeroxes?
You don't mind providing?
No, that's what we, if you read that, that's what we are here for.
It's not like the HRC in Texas where they won't copy a thing.
Oh, is that right?
I didn't realize that.
The HRC.
The Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas.
We will not only copy anything, but even if it doesn't have publication rights on it, which usually go partly with the owner of the manuscript and partly with the heir to whichever state it was,
Whoever, you know, for example, King Henry VIII.
King Henry VIII's heirs have publication rights, and we all know the manuscript has some King Henry VIII things.
Quite a few, really.
Very huge production.
Is this going to give me some idea of the general holding?
Yes, absolutely.
What is your profession, sir?
Well, I was a mathematician and a teacher on time.
And then I wanted to teach full-time.
But teaching salaries were not that great back in, this was 20 years ago.
And in order to supplement the income I had from being a mathematician in industry, I decided to invest a few real estate houses.
Invest in a couple of houses.
Invest in houses, yeah, a couple of them.
Because at that time, the rents were more than the payments.
And so you could make a profit now.
You know, your payments are doubled.
But at that time, you could make $10 a house.
What are we talking, 60s, 1960s?
In the late 60s, yeah, very late 60s.
So I invested in several of them in order to become a full-time teacher.
And by the time I was ready, by the time I had enough several houses in order to teach, the industry was laying off people.
And they were all going anywhere they could.
uh like it was like during the old crisis in 73 and they were going anywhere they could including the teaching job they're taking up everything because they didn't want to be unemployed and so there wasn't any openings at the time i couldn't just walk over to a teaching job because there's 5 000 applicants and so i decided well i'll invest a few more houses and you know i'll even be better off when i can get with when the time comes it turns out that by the time
The time came, and I was ready, and the teaching positions were available.
I had so many houses that I had no time to teach, in fact.
And I had to quit my industry job to take care of the houses.
What was the industry job?
I was a mathematician at G.E.
Temple, it was called.
Are you a Californian?
I was born in Santa Barbara, believe it or not, but as a child, I lived in Minnesota.
I was
I was born in 1936, and when the Second World War started, I was, well, four or five years old, my parents couldn't speak Japanese, and they thought they might have to.
They thought the Japanese were going to take over California up to the Rocky Mountains, and so everybody has to get back east.
So they believed this, and we went back to Duluth, Minnesota, if you can believe.
Were your parents, are they Californians?
My mother was born in Duluth, and even though she came out here as a child, she was born there, so that's why we went back there.
But really, it was fear of the Japanese coming to California?
Yes, absolutely.
Nothing else, in fact.
And so we moved back there, and we lived back there for my entire school career.
And I thought I was trapped like that.
I had no idea I could even move, you know, because you're there.
You have to be there.
But when I got married, all of a sudden, I was working for Remington Rangina back at the time, and they said, how would you like to move to sunny California?
Oh, sunny San Diego.
Oh, no.
How would you like to move to San Diego?
And I couldn't remember where San Diego was.
That was a very small town at the time.
Maybe that's in Miami or something like that.
They said, it's in sunny California.
And all of a sudden,
Something clicked.
I said, what am I doing in Minnesota?
I mean, I don't have to stay here.
So we accepted their offer of coming out and starting it with several other people starting at the UNIVAC branch in San Diego.
And how old were you?
I was 22 at the time, I think.
Could you just give me a little fast biographical education where did you go to school?
Okay, went to the University of Minnesota and got a
bachelor's there and worked towards a master's there and transferred out here when we I was working on my master's when we transferred out to San Diego with Unibac and got my master's at San Diego State and then I worked on a PhD program at University of California in Santa Barbara and did all the coursework but didn't take the test by that time I had so many houses that I just couldn't
So you became a real estate tycoon.
So I became a real estate tycoon, although that was not my first desire.
I wanted to be a teacher.
But it's important.
This certainly gave you the means to become... That's right.
By the time we opened our eyes, we had so many houses, we didn't know what to... You know, I knew houses were going up and bad because the baby boomers could see the huge classes in school.
from the 9th grade down to 10th grade up, nobody.
And then next year, this whole big mass of people would be 10th grade down and nobody from 11th grade up.
So you could see this huge mass going through the school system.
And as soon as they got out of school, you know they would have to inundate the housing stock.
And so you knew the prices were going to go up.
And so although my first goal was just to buy enough to profit from this and also to increase the income, which it did at the time,
By the time the jobs for teaching were available, I had so many of them that I thought, well, you know, I can't do anything now.
I've got to spend full time.
Might as well just get more.
So you would call yourself an investor at that point?
Yes.
So I became a full-time investor and just went out with a vengeance thinking, well, I know they're going to go up.
Why don't I do it big?
And this was largely in the Santa Barbara area?
Just Santa Barbara area, right.
Which took off like crazy.
Which was probably...
The number one place to buy.
So that's what gave me the background, the money to do this, I guess.
And so now tell me about this passion, which certainly must have become that, a passion.
One day... Do you have any idea when this one day is to... One day back in 1968, I think it was.
Or 70, I'm sorry, 78 or 79, I forget what it was.
78, I think.
My wife and I were at the Huntington Library, which has paintings and a library manuscript.
And we looked in one of these cases and we saw a document which we couldn't believe.
It was a pass that Lincoln gave to one of his bodyguards before the night he was killed.
And we said, why is this not in the National Archives?
Why is this in Mr. Huntington's collection?
Why is it not in the National Archives?
And they informed us that the National Archives was not opened in 1776, like most of us think.
In fact, it wasn't even built until 1935.
And they weren't even able to obtain the Declaration of Independence until 1952.
Well, I don't know where it was in 1951, but I was around, you know, I could have run over there and done it.
And so they informed us that we could see these things being
bought and sold and exchanged if we go to Sotheby's or Christie's in London or New York, which we did.
And all of a sudden we really almost fainted because we saw documents which made the Huntington's documents look like nothing.
And this was just the past.
We saw the Emancipation Proclamation of the United States.
We saw the Declaration of Independence of Peru.
We saw the Constitution.
I mean, these are the original handwritten drafts for these
world-known documents, you know, and they were selling them.
You know, to get enough money, you could buy the Constitution of the Confederate States of America, you know, not at checkout.
But, I mean, so what?
It still has to have something.
Oh, well, certainly.
I've got to have this thing.
Yes, well, you know, I'm sort of materialistic in that respect, too, of course, but to think that the history of these things, I don't know if I had a
love of history before.
I must have, I guess.
But it really impressed me that these super important world-class original documents were not already impounded somewhere.
And so we decided, I decided, to go at it with a vengeance and see how many of these I could get before people realized.
I mean, I couldn't believe that hundreds of years I'm the first guy to realize this.
Although, you know, if reading some books, you realize there are people who went after these things, but maybe they were so inexpensive at the time that if they went up in value, they thought, well, gee, that's too expensive.
If something is $5,000 and goes up to $20,000, they think, oh, my God, why should I pay $20,000 in the Declaration of Independence of
Peru, because that's how it's expensive.
Do you have a Declaration of Independence of Peru?
We did buy that, right.
And when did you buy that?
Actually, Sotheby's, I think.
So you would travel to New York for these shows?
I actually would send agents there and have them bid.
I would look at the catalogs and choose things and send them and have them bid.
And so we decided to, as I said, go out with a vengeance, and we just kept on bidding.
Of the things that were really important, we just kept on bidding until everybody dropped out.
We figured if somebody else was bidding, it must be worth at least that.
It's the underbidder theory.
The underbidder theory, right.
To digress for a moment, Malcolm Forbes, it's a little late Malcolm Forbes, who was telling a story one time, and he was talking to Ross Perot, who is really sort of an amateur manuscript person.
He bought a couple of them, great ones.
But they were both bidding on
a copy, I think, of the Emancipation Proclamation.
It wasn't even the original draft.
It was just a printed copy.
But somebody had gotten Lincoln's signature, a real signature on it.
And they were both bidding on it.
And it finally went for something like $400,000.
This is from Massachusetts.
They found this in a library in Massachusetts.
Yes, that's very possible.
And so they start talking later, and they
question each other, well, how come you were going so high in this?
I mean, you don't know that much about them.
And Forbes said to Perot, and Perot said, or Forbes, yeah, Perot said, well, I was watching you, and you know about manuscripts, and you kept on bidding, so I thought it's gotta be worth it, so I kept on bidding.
And Forbes said, oh my God, the only reason I was bidding is because you were bidding.
Now, how did you get the story?
Uh, I think Steve Forbes told me.
Really?
So it's from the Forbes family?
From the Forbes family, right, yeah.
So it's pretty good.
It might have been, I don't know, this had been years ago, so it might have been.
Yeah, I'm sure it came either through the family or someone who was standing there.
I wasn't standing there, but it could have been through Barnes, I think.
Okay.
If I use it, I just don't want it to be too apocryphal, that's all.
Um, yes, I'm not sure.
That's just the story I've got.
That's why I asked where you got it.
Um, unfortunately, I don't remember.
But, yeah, you better check.
See if Bart knows it and see if he has a response to that.
It's a great story.
Well, you could use, don't even use the names.
Use two great manuscripts.
Oh, I like the names.
I think Parole is a pretty good name.
Yeah, that's how it came to me.
And I think Bart knows that version of it and whether or not it's... Do you have an Emancipation Proclamation?
Yes, we do.
In fact, here is a... I thought I'd bring that down.
Inside, there's some writing about it.
Do you have many of these things, things like this, reprints?
Oh, brochures, you mean?
No, not that many.
I'll take as many as you've got.
These are the only two I have here that help me.
I don't have... So in the beginning, you said with a vengeance, it almost sounds like a feeding frenzy.
Yes, like a feeding frenzy.
We went out and we tried to purchase every single thing, kept on bidding no matter what.
I think we bought every major document that came up for four years.
Wow.
Every single one.
How about the focus?
Was there a focus or just major documents?
Just major.
It's got to be very major.
It's got to be something that a fifth grader would recognize.
That was my key.
If somebody in grade school would recognize it in their textbook, then it's certainly important.
Who are you generally buying through?
Bart in New York?
No.
Bart is our agent in New York.
We have Pierre Beres in France.
We have Richard Sawyer in London.
Dorothy Sloan in Houston, in Austin.
It's just different people.
We have Tony
uh tono tour gutierrez in mexico city we have uh breitfeld in argentina and you've gotten all these places oh yeah all of them we uh are quite active in at all times have you tried to start cataloging the collection well it's not yes it's on um it's on cards we have them on three to five cards and we have a
a summary on computer.
We can't do the whole computer thing.
It would take a tremendous effort to put everything on computer, to actually out-describe each document on the computer, because we have over a million documents now.
A million documents.
Do you have a sense of what these million documents are?
Oh, absolutely.
I can tell you.
They're all here.
My little computer.
motivation, I guess, is that these things, these historic things, these great things are available.
I guess I had a sense of history, which I was latent until I was older, but I was fascinated to see the document after Huntington, and then even more fascinated reading about, you know, it was certainly a, well, I'll tell you what, let me let you read
You're going to let us see a few things, too, right?
What?
You're going to let us see a few?
Sure, I'll bring down a few things.
You can read that.
It'll take a second.
And this might answer the question, in fact.
I'll shut this off for a second.
The reason we're a few minutes late, by the way, is we got caught in that La Casa.
That's okay.
If you had called at 9, I'd have been ready and waiting.
But if you don't call, I don't even remember.
But I'm always here.
Okay.
One of the themes that will run through my book, and I think that you're fulfilling this splendidly, is that the collector is more than an accumulator.
Oh, absolutely.
The collector is responsible, and I will give cite documents, instances of where the collector preserves the product of human achievement.
That's exactly right.
And you're doing this.
I might extend that one thing further, and that is that
Usually the institutional or the governmental agencies who preserve documents are very, very lax in their preservation techniques.
For example, the California archives, manuscript archives and printed archives, were stored in a basement which was known to flood.
In San Francisco, I think it was, or maybe Sacramento, I forget which.
And, in fact, it flooded, and most of it lost.
Once again, where was this?
in san francisco in california somewhere it's the california archives i'm not sure san francisco or the state archives right state archives our um secretary of state i believe is march or something like that recognized this problem and she just recently had a drive to create a new archives so that these things could be saved and uh that would be someone to talk to her that would be a real interesting point that
March?
Well, it's the Secretary of State, whoever named it.
I think it's March Yufong.
I'm not sure who it is.
Yeah, you should always check on any of my stories, because I hear them from other people.
I don't want to be the direct quote of anything.
I have a sense that you probably believe that every piece of documentation is a precious thing.
Absolutely.
That really nothing should be destroyed if it's on paper.
There's a lot of...
The Huntington Library, for example, has a little different view.
They think that every private piece of information should be saved.
And indeed, most of their documents are private letters in Californian history back in the 1850s of everybody.
And they have five million down there.
But mostly, as far as I know, they are letters from John Doe or Jose Garcia or whatever from California.
they then scholars can go there and read personal letters to get an idea of what happened in various parts that's really going farther than i wanted to go i wanted to stick with the with the monumental documents and fill in around them also and it is all manuscripts there are no printed books no there might be
One or two here, there.
Or a printed map or something.
Yeah, but it's a collection.
Oh, yeah.
99.99% is manuscript, right?
Unique material.
Yes, and original material.
Printed material would be a copy.
Unique means a manuscript which exists only in one state.
Yes, you should say one state.
Many letters, for example, if George Washington was writing to Benjamin Franklin in Paris,
He would write more than one.
He'd write maybe three or four.
And then he'd place one on each of three or four different ships.
And only two of them would get there out of five, maybe.
Because somehow people didn't do it.
About mail at the time.
Well, I don't know if they did that, but things got lost.
Things got destroyed.
So sometimes you'll find
two copies of the same letter.
Do you have multiple copies of the same letter?
Very, very few.
Once in a while we'll see a multiple copy of something, but that's very difficult.
Usually most of them are destroyed, but I think once or twice we'll see multiple copies.
Do you get a big kick out of getting something really exciting?
Tell me about the feeling.
Tell me if you could just tell us what, in your mind, are a few of the high spots in the collection.
Okay, which one?
You want me to tell you about the feeling or about the high spot?
Tell me about anything.
Tell me about the feeling and the high spot.
Okay, don't listen to something.
You don't.
Please, no, she's the girl.
I'm getting great documents is better than cotton candy, watermelon, and sex.
Really?
All at the same time.
Or whatever.
I'm sure everybody gets a kick out of a lot of things.
And that's what it feels like to me.
Just because you can feel, or you can feel the presence of these great men right there with you.
I mean, this was the document.
They were touching.
We've got documents where we know their fingerprints are on them, but we've got documents where they spill the ink a bit, and their fingerprints are right there.
We can see it.
George III writing something, and there's fingerprints right there.
And so you know that he was touching it, and his ideas are...
on the paper too, which gives even a closer tie.
Not only that, and the most important thing about manuscripts is the fact that when they wrote by hand, if they changed their mind about a certain idea, they would cross it out and write something else.
And so you can look underneath the cross out, which is not too difficult, and you can see what they taught first, what their first idea was.
Not only that, in some manuscripts, which are
drafts, maybe they were changed before they were printed, or maybe there are several drafts.
Maybe there's two drafts made, and the first draft, they left out a few things from the first draft, and the second, because they didn't think it would work out.
There's a couple variants.
Yeah, right.
But you don't see that in books.
From the printed copy, you don't see what they were thinking.
As a good example of this, in the American Bill of Rights, there was the four
Let's see, what was it?
The First Amendment of the... It was free speech.
Let me just take a... That's embarrassing.
I should have... Okay.
Guaranteed the natural... The First Amendment guaranteed the natural rights.
Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Yeah, if you remember it.
That's not what they wrote.
Life, liberty, and that's exactly right.
They said, life, liberty, possessing property, and the pursuit of happiness.
The reason they changed it is because property was slavery, and Thomas Jefferson said, hey.
Exactly.
Well, gee, you know the whole thing.
That's right.
It wasn't Thomas Jefferson, I don't think it was.
But someone else objected that if we put that in there, then...
you're disturbing our right to enslave.
Correct.
That's right.
So there's not only the three.
Did you have all these?
Yeah, well, this is the Bill of Rights.
But you have that draft.
Yeah.
Where did you get that?
Well, I guess there's three or four drafts.
How many drafts do you have?
We just have one.
One of them was just found in the National Archives just recently, which was
James Madison's own draft, and they were looking through his papers just in the last year, I think, or maybe two years, and they found the third draft of the Bill of Rights.
There's also one that I know is in Virginia, which is the same draft as we have, because the Bill of Rights came up through all of the states.
The states, after the Constitution was written, everybody said, okay, we need the Bill of Rights,
we didn't want to put it into the Constitution because it would make it more difficult to approve it, but now, for the first ten amendments, here we go, everybody made their suggestions, but of course Virginia had a Bill of Rights which they had been using for 10 or 20 years for their own constitution for the state, and they had thought so much on it, they said, well, we know what to do, and they submitted their own ideas, and the...
The Congress considered all the states' theories, but they eventually took 90% of the Virginian suggestions as the Bill of Rights.
Are you a full-time collector now?
No, half-time I still have to watch one of the tenants.
I'm trying to become a full-time collector.
a person in the library.
Do you see yourself still as a collector or as an archivist?
What do I see myself in?
That's a good question.
I certainly see myself as a collector, but I think of our exhibit halls as museums.
Now, these are open to the public?
Yes.
Is this something we can look at?
Yeah.
One of them here in Montecito is open just four times a year, four weekends a year, plus special openings.
And they have special exhibits.
In fact, I am going to be giving you schedules for the last 10 years or so, which when you read it, you'll see exactly what we have also.
You made a decision to share.
Absolutely.
I know a lot of collectors that don't even want you to know they exist.
That's true, and that surprises me because nobody knows what good is it.
Well, but then again, I think the manuscript and the book collector is a different creature from the art collector.
Possibly, so.
Well, have you ever thought of the Mona Lisa, if somehow someone stole it and said, you can have it for $1,000, and in a moment of who knows what, you bought it for $1,000,
and but you know it's stolen and let's say they say they the prerequisite you can't give it back and you can't uh you can show it if you want but you can't give it back okay so all of a sudden here's your mona lisa and you've just heard a lot better than the phone say it cost you you had to sell your home to get it and you don't know why you got it because it's stolen but now you have it now the question is can you you can't show the whole world's what i mean you'd be
I'm from jail for life, and they'll take it away, so you can't show it.
You can put it up in your basement and maybe show it to your best friend, hoping they won't tell.
What good is the Mona Lisa?
Yeah, but somebody just stole a Vanier from Boston.
Yes, but what good is it?
They're going to get tired of it very fast.
The only, if you think about that,
You could have the Mona Lisa in your basement and it is worthless.
It's no good to you even.
I mean, looking at it... And it's really quite legitimately worthless because it's so valuable you can't sell it.
You can't sell it.
And even if you could sell it, no one's going to buy it because everybody knows it's... Nobody can't buy it.
Yeah.
And so having it down there is no good because you can't even tell anybody about it.
So it's like it's not there at all.
I mean, you can look at it.
It's a big deal.
It's like... It doesn't...
The only value of that Van Mier or whatever it was.
Van Mier.
Van Mier, yeah.
Sorry.
And Rembrandt.
The only value to those are going back to the original owner and Ransom.
And Ransom.
That's the only value.
Okay.
This is so good.
I gather your artistic inclination, your collection, never was towards painting.
No, I have nothing but art.
Oh, these were, you know, these are just
Nothing, nothing, nothing.
I know nothing about ours.
Now, did you build this house as part of the empire?
No, this part of the house was here.
I'll give you two in a second.
But we added on a wing over there and a wing going down that way.
So we added on two wings.
Excuse me one second.
Okay.
Why bring her along in case we... Now, you were a teacher.
Yes.
And while you're not a teacher... Throughout this whole thing, I was a teacher.
One way or the other, I would always have a course that I was teaching.
While I was at UNIVAC in Minnesota, I was a graduate teacher taking courses and teaching at the University of Minnesota.
In San Diego, I taught for, I believe, actually, what did I teach for down there?
Goodness, I forget.
Oh, at USC Extension.
I taught a course at USC Extension, plus I was, with UNIVAC, I became the training supervisor with the Navy, between the Navy and UNIVAC.
Then when we came up here, I taught at one course at Westmont College, which is a college, plus Santa Barbara City College.
I taught for several years there, and also the... This is Mathematics.
Yeah, all Mathematics, yeah.
But she suggests that maybe sharing the collection the way you do is a way of giving back.
It's definitely a way of giving back.
I mean, the idea from the profits we made out of real estate, we feel that we should give back something somehow, and this is one way of doing it.
I want to be discreet, but I gather the profits were terrific.
We used to buy houses at $10,000 and $12,000 a piece.
Now that we're
250,000.
You mean buying?
That's the value of each of the houses.
So they've gone up from 10,000.
They've gone up 20-fold.
Wow.
In 20 years.
Now, of course, we didn't buy them all back 20 years ago.
Some, we were buying under 220,000, too.
And so those, we had no property.
Lately, for the past several years, we haven't purchased anything.
But they went up enormously.
And while they were going up, I was buying them as fast as I could.
I mean, I couldn't buy them any faster if
If I would, I would have bought them faster because I knew where they were going.
People thought when they went up from 10 to 15,000 people, I'd say, God, that's 50% increase.
Anybody buys that, they're going to go back to 10.
You're going to lose 50% of your investment on every one you buy.
And yet my figure showed I was an acquisition.
So I actually could get an idea of supply and demand and the number of people coming up as baby boomers.
And I think it showed that it was up to $175,000.
And so at $15,000, $20,000, $30,000, $40,000, I was just buying.
I knew this was cheap compared.
But you know, you have to be able to handle it.
You know, you can't do it.
I should have actually hired other people.
Can you give you an idea, if you want to or if you don't want to, what you gave into the collection?
That would be difficult.
I sort of know.
That's fine.
I respect that.
Everything I touch in that respect is... I mean, real estate or manuscript seems to do very well.
When I, for the first four years, as I said... What were those four years, by the way?
79 or 80 to 84, something like that.
Then all of a sudden...
All of these countries decided that they have been making mistakes.
Rather than keeping the first edition, you know, when they print up the Declaration of Independence, the first one comes off the press as the main copy.
And then they throw away the draft back to the owner or whatever.
And so they realized they had made mistakes just a few years ago.
This is not a hundred years ago.
And so they, everybody was trying to get, also universities have,
when they wanted to raise money for a building, or when a museum wanted to raise money, they would sell, to buy a painting, they'd all sell manuscripts, because they knew they could buy an equal manuscript later, evidently.
I don't know why they would sell a manuscript, but they felt they were like money.
So they'd sell some, a couple years later, buy some back, so they'd have some great manuscripts.
Well, after the four years, they realized that they were going out, but there wasn't anything coming back in.
And so they raised their sights a bit, and of course we did too, and then all of a sudden it just exploded, and that was crazy, just like the houses.
Now some young guy might come along and say, gee, that should be in the National Archives.
How come that's here in the public?
It's only $5 million.
How come in these lives that's worth $20 million?
But things that were selling for $40,000 or even $100,000 are selling for a million, two millions.
it's gone the same routes as i don't know if that was inflation like how did this oracle was the realization now the market these things have taken off yeah and especially manuscripts but uh i gather that as a collector it's not like you know the mindset isn't i'm looking to get something at a good price your mindset is i'm looking to get something
i'm definitely looking and i'm willing and i'm not willing to pay whatever i have to pay almost to a degree there are some dealers out there that you don't want to know that say that you don't want to give them a blank check that's right because they will just say okay instead of 100 000 100 million i don't have that kind of money oh 170 000 let's say oh well i mean that's you know but they would no then these guys go 10 100 times and then
then say, well, how close to 100 million, I mean, they would, you know, I doubt one fell spoof if it's that great.
And so you have to actually, because you have to turn down things.
Although I didn't for the first four years, but in the last four years, if I felt, unless they were unbelievable things, but if they're really great items, but they are not the end of the world things, you have to turn them down sometimes to keep these people from
raising their price every time they talk to you.
Because eventually they will want the entire national debt for one thing.
And there's only a couple of guys like that.
Most of the dealers that get involved in this, and Sotheby's and Christie's are in trouble.
They're not too hard either.
They try to push up the prices.
You know, it's said, well, who knows?
But there are ways to push up prices, certainly, aren't there?
Oh, absolutely.
They know they've got certain left bids there.
Well, Sotheby's comes out, and they put an estimate on something, and it's ten times what it sold for three years ago.
Now, how do they know that?
I mean, do they toss them and find out that someone would pay ten times as much?
Why are they guessing?
And in many cases, they're right.
But that's probably one of the worst at pushing up.
But there's a couple of dealers that are even worse.
Yeah.
My wife is noticing here also that you collect great authors, scientists, philosophers, statesmen, sovereigns, leaders, pardon me, from all the periods of world history.
So you just say, if it's significant, I want it.
And of course, if you get bored and you can't find something that a fifth grader recognizes, then you can get a little more deeper into history.
How about literature?
Do you have holographic manuscripts and writings?
Yes, you name the writings.
Hopefully.
Yeah, we've got Steinbeck.
You know, he just came out, he did, his wife just came out with a book that he had written called The Acts of
King Arthur and his Noble Knights.
Just published, yeah, that's right.
Just published, yeah, which was his main thing in his whole life.
He loved King Arthur, and he had written his book, and it hadn't been published before, and his wife had the manuscript.
And so he just came out with that, and we have that manuscript.
He bought that privately, or?
He bought that from the wife through a New York dealer, a fellow named Fleming.
The late John Foreman.
The late John Foreman, yeah.
Success at the Rosenbach.
Yes, exactly, yeah.
And we have four or five other.
Hemingway?
Hemingway, I'm not sure what I have, but Hemingway.
He's not one of my favorites, but I'm sure I have one of his favorites.
But he's a top favorite.
He's a good one, he's a good one, he's a good one, he's a good one, he's a good one.
I don't know, I've seen... How long in Sacramento that's got a pretty good... Hemingway collection, I guess.
Every auction seems to have a hundred of these things, so they're so...
Maybe mostly letters.
I don't see too many manuscripts.
No, manuscripts are tough.
There are only nine novels anyway.
But I haven't gone much for him because he seemed so common.
I didn't want to get involved.
But I think I have some things.
I'm not sure.
You were going to tell me some of your high spots.
What to you are high spots.
Okay.
What to me are high spots.
Goodness, that's difficult.
Well, in the next year, I'm trying to just think what we're going to be showing the next year at the museum.
Next year, 1992, of course, is the 500th anniversary of the Discovery of America.
Now, Columbus manuscripts are illegal to own, evidently, because if they export them from Spain or Italy, I think it's for death penalty.
So, nobody wants to... Except that there are Columbus manuscripts from the Great Museum, which is a lot of... Very few.
There are letters, and the discovery...
or something like that so there's not too many and a couple of the uh the diary things there's a couple families that have multiple letters in a couple of museums very very cute however um so most of the exhibits will not have a original cum performance letter uh but we do have probably the closest thing to that we have a letter from pertinent and isabella uh relaying to the pope
their ownership of the new world after Columbus just got back from his voyage.
Yeah, that's one of my wife's favorites.
You got that at auction?
No, we bought that from a fellow named Krauts.
Hans Peet.
Hans Peet, yeah.
From Hans himself or his wife?
Well, no.
Yeah, from himself.
A couple of years, not that long, maybe two years.
Yeah.
Just before I started, which was a shame because
He was the greatest living bookseller, no question.
He was definitely not a manuscript man, but a bookseller.
Well, I mean, we use bookseller generically.
I mean, I think it embraces... There's a little... They're different, but... I mean, John Fleming, for instance, dealt with everything.
He's a bookseller, too.
Dr. Rosenbach dealt with everything.
But Rosenbach was half-half.
He was half manuscript, half bookseller.
We had 30 manuscript.
See, Fleming and Sprout...
I mean, they had great books.
So we got that privately through Krauss.
Through Krauss, yeah.
And the price was fair.
$60,000 or $70,000 at the time.
That's pretty damn nice.
I saw a young kid that was cheap at the time, and that was 15 years old.
I saw a kid at the Bradley Martin sale.
A kid, 22 years old, spent $28,000 for an ascribed copy of Tarzan.
Do you know what the kid's name was?
I've got it written down.
Not Joe Magdalena.
No, Joe Magdalena's a dealer.
Well, I thought maybe that's the kid.
That kid spent $450.
No, this was a kid, a collector, and he was with the dealer, and I spotted him.
I don't know where the kid got the money.
That's the top family money.
He had a small inheritance.
He spent $100,000 at the sale.
This might have been, do you think, did he say, no, he hadn't been with him this thing.
He sat with a dealer, the dealer bought for him.
Okay.
I can use his name, but it's in a notebook, and you'd better have it with me.
I'll call you in.
Well, this kid is probably smarter than most of us because these things are still.
He's investing in his life.
Yeah, he's taking the money.
Well, I think, and even in my mind, when you look at everything as an investment, even though there's no possibility we will ever divest ourselves of any of these,
No possibility?
No possibility.
Well, we're going to endow the libraries, or the museums, and no more in favor.
And part of the trust that we have set up for the libraries requires that even these manuscripts, the major manuscripts, and we say all of them because we can't specify which one, cannot be told any.
This is like a Hutchington Trust in progress.
A gestation, right?
Yeah, exactly.
uh people's wishes over the years yeah that's right you're really going to you're really going to stipulate quite definitely that none of this stuff can be that's fine but you have to make sure that they have plenty of money to make that's exact that's the advantage we are going to also have half of our states those are our state goes to our children and the other half goes to the library and being a mathematician i have instructed them exactly
how they can spend this money.
And the money will be, I believe it's only 50% of the money can be used to maintain the libraries and to buy new, first of all, maintain the library.
You have to do all the expenses that are, that have to be paid.
And then with the rest, they can buy new manuscripts.
And with half of it, they can't touch it.
They have to have it in a very,
secure, very, very secure, maybe low interest, doesn't make any difference.
Investment, such as a bank or bonds or some savings bonds or something like it, United States bonds, half of it cannot ever be touched.
Now, if you start thinking about that, that means half the money is going to make money.
And, of course, for the first 10, 15, 20, 50 years, big deal, it's going to make interest.
But do you realize what a million dollars is if you have it for 400 years?
That's more money than there is in the United States.
Except that Huntington left six million or whatever, and that's not enough, they say.
Okay, but they left six million, but I think they used most of it, too, or something.
I don't know.
And then they're trying to charge admission.
Everything's going to be free, but we also... That's stipulated, too.
It always has to be free.
But the key is that he didn't set up a program.
What a good story, by the way.
Every 20 years, that money is going to be 1,600% more than we put in.
If we put in a million dollars, for every million we put in, every 20 years, it'll be worth 16 million.
Or every 16 years, it'll be 20 million.
Let's say 20 years.
Every 20 years, it'll be 16, unless interest rates drop.
you know, considerably.
But if you invest in mortgages, for example, which is good, bonds, mortgages, whatever, you know, give it to people like savings loans do.
Give it to people as first trustees on their house.
Even if the house goes down value, so you take back value, it's still worth something.
And if the economy shrinks and the money shrinks, that's okay.
Just so you don't lose, don't invest in something that disappears.
If you put it in
to a second trustee where the value of the house goes below and you lose everything, that's bad.
But if you put it in a secure item, it will, even if the value goes down, it's still the principal should be there a portion of it.
At any rate, every 16 years, or every 20 years, it'll be 16, a million, every million will be 16 million.
16.
16 million.
And therefore, in 40 years, it'll be 256 million.
In 80 years, every time, by the time a couple hundred years passes, which of course is like thinking back into the 1700s now, which is a long, long time, but it will be multi-trillions of dollars.
And so they will have so much money, and yet they won't be able to spend it.
I mean, if they obey the wishes of God, it'll be the richest museum in the world.
It'll make Getty look like a piker.
But at some point, don't you want them to be able to spend the money?
No.
They'll be able to spend half of it at any time, and they can use half of it to create more, too.
Doesn't the government require that you have to spend a percentage?
I don't know.
I saw this in the Getty Trust, by the way.
I've got the paperwork.
Well, I remember Getty is required to spend some money.
I don't know why, though.
Because the law requires that they have to spend a minimum of 4.5%.
Okay, well, I'm saying 50%.
Okay.
Certainly within the limits.
You're a young man.
Is this for the future?
It's after I pass away.
It's a living trust type situation where it starts with both my wife and I disappear.
But the paperwork is in place.
Oh, it's there.
Already in place.
Not really.
All four of our kids don't seem to have
any passion for this at all.
But your wife shares a passion.
Yes.
That's unusual.
She, well, she looks and she shares in a different respect.
She's more a social person.
Like most women, excuse me.
There she is.
We'll ask her.
I think she heard that, so she's coming.
And so she handles a different aspect of it.
She doesn't delve through the... This is Marcia.
Hi, how are you?
Doing a little interview.
Oh, are you?
Really?
Oh, you've got to go.
What do you think of your husband's... Has he done Quixote or is he... I noticed you have a Quixote in there for you.
That's interesting.
That's an interesting question.
Actually, we're just talking about you.
Where are you from?
How many have you used?
We're from Massachusetts.
And what do you recognize?
I'm a writer.
I'll shut this up.
The title of the book is A Gentle Madness.
A Gentle Madness.
And it's derivative of a man named Isaiah Thomas.
Not unlike yourself, I see resonant themes.
He was a printer in Massachusetts, made a fortune.
He was the most prominent printer in the United States.
And he wrote a book which is still in print, The History of Printing of North America.
he researched manuscripts of Fenler and basically his collection became the American Antiquarian Society.
Oh, yes.
Which is, I mean, he founded it, mainly the Holocaust's collection.
They have one of the two printed copies of the ratification of the Benedict.
Who has the other?
We do.
And when he died, his grandsons wrote in a tribute
My grandfather was afflicted with the gentlest of infirmities.
So I derived that.
I think there's a book called Auction Madness.
Yes, I've talked to him.
It's a scurrilous book.
Yes.
Charles Hamilton's book.
Oh, is it Charles Hamilton?
I don't know.
I just remember the book.
I didn't remember that he wrote it.
He's the autographed guy in New York.
was the autographed guy in the art trilogy.
Sure.
Do you have a deal with Cameron Dell up in the... Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
He is certainly a major adjunct to the manuscript world.
He's good.
I guess.
He's a weird fellow.
He would like to think of himself as the number one manuscript person in the world.
And indeed, for a while,
He was close to it, if not the number one manuscript dealer in the world.
As far as being the number one expert, I don't think he can... He likes to think that, but he is... He needs a lot more education, I think.
He's a young guy, though.
He's a young guy, and I don't think he's going to go to try to learn any of these things.
When they had these Mormon... Don't ask him about the Hoffman stuff.
Yeah.
He claimed to authenticate certain things, and the FBI, if you read the book, the FBI eventually states in there, my God, this guy doesn't know a damn thing.
Talking about Rendell, when he was testifying, he was just saying, the guy's a manuscript person, he can look at a manuscript and say, yeah, it looks genuine, that's all he is.
He doesn't know anything about, he doesn't know much about ink, he doesn't know much about paper, he doesn't know much about handwriting, really.
But he, on the other hand, is a,
was probably one of the most important dealers, yeah.
Sort of faded out.
Who has surpassed him any of you?
Well, it's hard to say.
Right now, believe it or not, the kid, Joe Magdalena, is probably the most... He's about 23 years old.
Well, he's got people in back.
I'm not even sure he knew anything about manuscripts.
There must be a manuscript dealer behind him who was secretly doing this.
I don't know who.
I see him at the auction.
I was wearing a T-shirt.
I filled a hole in the notebook.
I said, T-shirt just bid $100,000.
Who is this kid in a T-shirt?
Finally, I went up and introduced myself.
He gave me his card.
Yes, he's got big money of another real estate person behind him.
Beverly Hills.
He's in Beverly Hills, right.
Now, he's one of the great ones.
There are some, I don't know if there's any real leader at the moment.
Well, that's good to do.
Rendell was at one time, but it depends on how you're dealing.
Rendell was dealing several years ago, and his prices were reasonable.
And if you get greedy and try to raise them so that you have no more customers, then you disappear from being a manuscript dealer, almost.
And Rendell has done that recently.
Do you think he's priced himself out of the market?
I think so, and he's stopped buying.
and he's raised the prices on everything to where no one would buy it.
I think Rendell's a collector also.
He's got a secret collection.
He showed it to me.
Oh, he did.
Which is normally good.
I would a hundred times rather talk to a dealer who's a collector because he really knows what's good and who knows, maybe he'll sell one of his collections.
But his collections are focused on areas that he's kind of about to be dealing in.
which is kind of legitimate, which is legitimate, I believe.
Rendell, if he wanted to, could, within two or three weeks, turn himself around and become the greatest theater in the world.
I mean, if he wanted to, he could somehow go around, spend a lot of money, buy a lot of great manuscripts, and put out catalogs again.
I haven't seen catalogs from him.
I mean, instead of one every couple of months, I'd barely see one a year.
He's moving, or has just moved through?
He just moved.
It had a beautiful place, but I don't know why I knew it.
I'm going to put this on the other side before I run it out.